JAVASCRIPT THEORY

1. What is JavaScript? What are its main features?

JavaScript is a programming language used to make web pages interactive.
It runs inside the browser and also on servers using Node.js.

Main features are as follow:
It is a scripting language, so it does not need to be compiled first.
It is dynamically typed, meaning we do not need to write the data type
of a variable.

2. What is the difference between var, let, and const?
var:
It is function scoped, not block scoped.
It can be redeclared and updated.
It gets hoisted and initialized as undefined.

let:
It is block scoped, meaning it only works inside the {} where it is
written.
It can be updated but not redeclared in the same scope.

const:
Also block scoped.
Value cannot be reassigned after it is set.
But if it is an object or array, we can still change its content

3. What are primitive and non-primitive data types in JavaScript?

Primitive data types store a single simple value directly. Example:
string, number, boolean, null, etc
Non-primitive data types store a reference (address) to the value,
Example:
object, array, function.

4. What is the difference between == and ===?

== is called loose equality. It compares values only, and if the
types are different, it converts one type to another before
comparing
=== is called strict equality. It compares both value and type
without converting anything. 
It is usually better to use === because it avoids unexpected results
from automatic type conversion.


5. What is type coercion in JavaScript?

Type coercion means JavaScript automatically converts one data type
into another when needed. This can happen implicitly or explicitly.

Example of implicit coercion:
"5" + 1 gives "51" (number gets converted to string)
"5" - 1 gives 4 (string gets converted to number)

Example of explicit coercion:
Number("5") converts the string "5" to the number 5.
String(5) converts the number 5 to the string "5".


6. What is the difference between null and undefined?

undefined means a variable has been declared but no value has been
assigned to it yet.
null means "no value" and it is assigned on purpose by the
programmer to show that a variable should have no value.


7. What is the difference between undefined and not defined?

undefined means the variable exists but has no value assigned to it.
not defined means the variable was never declared at all in the code. 

8. What are truthy and falsy values in JavaScript?


Falsy values (treated as false):
false, 0, "" (empty string), null

Truthy values (treated as true):
Almost everything else, including non-empty strings


FUNCTIONS AND SCOPE
--------------------

9. What is the difference between a function declaration and function
expression?

Function declaration:
function greet() {
  console.log("Hello");
}
It is hoisted completely, so we can call it even before it is
written in the code.

Function expression:
const greet = function () {
  console.log("Hello");
};
Here the function is stored in a variable. It is not hoisted the same
way, so we cannot call it before this line runs.


10. What are arrow functions? How are they different from normal
functions?

Arrow functions are a shorter way to write functions
const add = (a, b) => a + b;

Differences from normal functions:
Arrow functions do not have their own "this". They use "this" from
the place where they are written (called the outer scope).
They cannot be used as constructors (cannot use "new" with them).

11. What is scope in JavaScript? Explain global, function, and block
scope.

Scope means where a variable can be accessed in the code.
Global scope: Variable declared outside any function or block. It
can be accessed from anywhere in the code.
Function scope: Variable declared inside a function using var. It
can only be accessed inside that function.
Block scope: Variable declared using let or const inside {}
It can only be accessed inside that block.


12. What is a closure in JavaScript? Give a real-world example.

A closure is when a function remembers the variables from its outer
function, even after the outer function has finished running.


Here, the inner function still remembers the "count" variable even
though counter() has already finished running. This is used in real
projects for things like counters, private variables, and function
factories.


13. What is hoisting in JavaScript?

Hoisting means JavaScript moves variable and function declarations to
the top of their scope before running the code.

var variables are hoisted and set to undefined until the actual
line runs.
function declarations are hoisted completely with their full code,
so they can be called before they appear in the file.


14. What is the "this" keyword in JavaScript?

"this" refers to the object that is currently calling the function.
Its value depends on how the function is called, not where it is
written.

In an object method, "this" refers to that object.
In an arrow function, "this" refers to the "this" of the outer
scope where the arrow function was created.


ADVANCED JAVASCRIPT
---------------------

15. What is a callback function?

A callback function is a function that is passed as an argument into
another function, and it is called later, usually after some task is
completed.

Callbacks are commonly used for async tasks like reading files, API
calls, or timers.


16. What are Promises in JavaScript? Explain pending, fulfilled, and
rejected.

A Promise is an object that represents a value that may not be
available yet, but will be available in the future. It is used to
handle async operations in a cleaner way than callbacks.

A promise has three states:
pending: the initial state, task is still in progress.
fulfilled: the task completed successfully, and we get a result.
rejected: the task failed, and we get an error.

17. What is async/await and how does it work with Promises?

async/await is a simpler way to work with Promises, so the code
looks like normal step by step code instead of using .then() chains.

"async" is written before a function to say that this function
will return a Promise.
"await" is used inside an async function to pause the code until
the Promise is resolved or rejected.
This looks cleaner than chaining multiple .then() calls.


18. What is the JavaScript Event Loop? Explain the Call Stack, Web
APIs, Callback Queue, and Microtask Queue.

JavaScript is single threaded, meaning it can only do one thing at a
time. The event loop is what allows it to still handle things like
timers and API calls without blocking the rest of the code.

Call Stack: Where the currently running code is tracked. Functions
get added when called and removed when finished.

Web APIs: Browser features that run outside the call stack, handled by the browser itself.

Callback Queue : Where callback functions wait after their Web API task is done,
until the call stack is empty.

Microtask Queue: Where Promise callbacks (.then, .catch, async/await)
wait. This queue has higher priority than the callback queue, so its
tasks run first when the call stack is empty.



19. What is the difference between shallow copy and deep copy?

Shallow copy: Only copies the first level of an object or array. If
the object has nested objects or arrays inside it, both the original
and the copy will still point to the same nested data.
Example: using spread operator or Object.assign() creates a
shallow copy.

Deep copy: Copies all levels of the object, including nested objects
and arrays, so the copy is completely independent of the original.
Example: using JSON.parse (JSON.stringify(obj)) or structuredClone(obj)
creates a deep copy.


20. What are map(), filter(), reduce(), forEach(), and find()? When
would you use each?

map(): Creates a new array by transforming every element. Use it
when you want to change each item and get a new array back.

filter(): Creates a new array with only the elements that pass a
condition. Use it when you want to keep some items and remove others.

reduce(): Combines all elements into a single value, like a total
sum or a combined object. Use it when you need one final result from
the whole array.

forEach(): Runs a function on every element, but does not return a
new array. Use it when you just want to loop through items and do
something

find(): Returns the first element that matches a condition, or
undefined if nothing matches